h1. Sirius - Provide a tool filter

h2. Goals

The extension point @org.eclipse.sirius.diagram.toolManagement@ allows to contribute filters which can hide tools from the diagram palette depending on some custom condition. Contributed filters must implement @org.eclipse.sirius.diagram.tools.api.management.ToolFilter@. Many extensions can be provided. If many extensions are provided, the tool in the palette will be hidden as soon as at least one ToolFilter's @filter(DDiagram diagram, AbstractToolDescription tool)@ implementation returns true. It is important to leverage the given arguments diagram and tool to make sure that the tool is filtered for the specific use case only.

h2. Example

Here is an example that filters tools based on an imaginary concept of advanced and basic user profiles.

You have to add your tool filter contribution in the plugin.xml file.

pre.. 
<extension point="org.eclipse.sirius.diagram.toolManagement">
   <toolFilter
     class="com.acme.UserProfileToolFilter">
   </resourceStrategy>
</extension>

p. The class references a class implementing @ToolFilter@. The corresponding code is:

pre.. 
/**
 * Filter diagram tools according to a given user profile
 */
public class UserProfileToolFilter implements ToolFilter {

    @Override
    public boolean filter(DDiagram diagram, AbstractToolDescription tool);
        return isAdvancedProfileTool(tool) && !isAdvancedUser(diagram);
    }

    @Override
    private boolean isAdvancedProfileTool(AbstractToolDescription tool){
    	//...
    }

    private bookean isAdvancedUser(DDiagram diagram){
    	//...
    }    

}

p. 
