h1. Sirius Specifier Manual

This document describes how to create your own designers using Sirius. To learn how to *_use_* existing designers, refer to the "Sirius User Manual":../user/Sirius%20User%20Manual.html .

You will find the following sections:
* "*Viewpoints*":general/Specifying_Viewpoints.html gives a general overview of what viewpoints are and how they are specified, tested and deployed.
* The next sections are specific to a kind of representation supported by Sirius:
** "*Diagrams*":diagrams/Diagrams.html describes how to specify general graphical modelers.
** "*Sequence Diagrams*":sequences/Sequence%20Diagrams.html are a special case of diagram with many peculiarities and specific kinds of tools, which are detailed here.
** "*Tables*":tables/Tables.html covers how to specify both edition tables and matrix-like cross-tables.
** "*Trees*":trees/Trees.html shows how to create tree-like modelers for a hierarchical view of data.
* "*Model Operations*":general/Model_Operations.html describes the small language which can be used throughout "_Viewpoint Specification Models_":../Glossary.html#VSM to describe behavior (for example for tools).
* "*Colors*":general/Colors.html explains how colors can be specified for all kinds of representations.
* "*Queries and Interpreted Expressions*":general/Writing_Queries.html explains the general rules to follow to write the expressions used inside "_Viewpoint Specification Models_":../Glossary.html#VSM, and the various languages supported.
* The "*Feature Matrix*":general/Feature_Matrix.html provides a cross-reference between most of the features of Sirius and concrete example usages of them in the Family example modeler.

For more information on Sirius, please refer to the "*Sirius User Manual*":../user/Sirius%20User%20Manual.html, which describes how end-users can use the designers you created.

In addition to this documentation, see also the "main project site":http://www.eclipse.org/sirius and the "top-level wiki page":http://wiki.eclipse.org/Sirius.
